Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

Bingyi Kang 1 Zequn Jie 2 Jiashi Feng 1

Abstract
Exploration remains a signiﬁcant challenge to reinforcement learning methods, especially in environments where reward signals are sparse. Recent
methods of learning from demonstrations have
shown to be promising in overcoming exploration
difﬁculties but typically require considerable highquality demonstrations that are difﬁcult to collect. We propose to effectively leverage available
demonstrations to guide exploration through enforcing occupancy measure matching between the
learned policy and current demonstrations, and
develop a novel Policy Optimization from Demonstration (POfD) method. We show that POfD induces implicit dynamic reward shaping and brings
provable beneﬁts for policy improvement. Furthermore, it can be combined with policy gradient methods to produce state-of-the-art results, as
demonstrated experimentally on a range of popular benchmark sparse-reward tasks, even when
the demonstrations are few and imperfect.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) solves sequential decision
making problems based on the experiences collected by
interacting with environments. Thanks to the advances in
deep learning, various neural network powered RL methods
have made signiﬁcant progress for multiple applications,
including Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015; Van Hasselt et al.,
2016; Mnih et al., 2016), robot locomotion tasks (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017) and the game of Go (Silver et al.,
2016; 2017). However, exploration problems, that how to
gain more experience with novel strategies to improve the
performance in the long run, are still challenging in deep
RL methods. When the reward signals are sparse and rare,
existing methods still struggle to explore effectively to learn
meaningful policies. This is because most of them rely
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Tencent AI Lab, China. Correspondence to: Bingyi Kang <kang@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).

on heuristic exploration strategies, e.g., -greedy for value
based methods (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) and noise-based
exploration for policy gradient methods (Sutton et al., 2000),
which are undirected and incapable of ﬁnding interesting
states explicitly.
Some recent works (Nair et al., 2017; Houthooft et al., 2016;
Plappert et al., 2017; Pathak et al., 2017) have been devoted
to tackling the exploration problems in RL. They are basically rooted in the following two ideas. 1) Reshape the
original reward function by encouraging the agent to visit
states never seen before, driven by intrinsic curiosity (Pathak
et al., 2017) or information gain (Houthooft et al., 2016).
2) Use demonstration trajectories sampled from an expert
policy to guide the learning procedure, by either putting
the demonstrations into a replay memory (Nair et al., 2017;
Hester et al., 2017; Večerı́k et al., 2017) or using them to pretrain the policy in a supervised manner (Silver et al., 2016).
Learning from demonstrations has shown promising performance in overcoming exploration difﬁculties in sparsereward environments. However, existing schemes cannot
fully leverage the power of the demonstration data, limited
by only treating them in the same way as self-generated data,
and usually require a tremendous number of high-quality
demonstrations which are difﬁcult to collect at scale.
To address this problem, we propose to combine above
two ideas by developing a principled method that rewards
demonstration-like actions more during interaction with
environments, which thus encourages exploration for meaningful states when feedback is sparse. The intuition is that,
when the reward signal is not available, the agent should
mimic the demonstrated behavior in early learning stages
for exploration. After acquiring sufﬁcient skills, the agent
can explore new states on its own. This is actually a dynamic intrinsic reward mechanism that can be introduced
for reshaping native rewards in RL. To this end, we propose
a novel Policy Optimization from Demonstration (POfD)
method, which can acquire knowledge from demonstration
data to boost exploration, even though the data are scarce
and imperfect. We realize our idea with three technical novelties. 1) We reformulate the policy optimization objective
by adding a demonstration-guided exploration term, which
measures the divergence between the current policy and
the expert one, forcing expert-alike exploration. We theoretically analyze the beneﬁts brought by POfD to vanilla

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

policy gradient ones, in terms of improvement over the
expected return. 2) We convert the proposed objective to
a new one deﬁned on occupancy measure (Ho & Ermon,
2016) for better exploiting demonstrations and establish an
optimization-friendly lower bound. 3) We eventually draw
a connection between optimizing the derived lower bound
and generative adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
and show that the optimization can thus easily proceed in
a manner of alternating between two sub-procedures. One
is ﬁtting a discriminator measuring the similarity between
expert data and self-generated data to reshape the reward;
the other one is updating the policy with the gradient from
the reshaped reward function. POfD is general and compatible with most policy gradient methods. We also show that
existing replay memory based learning from demonstration
methods (Hester et al., 2017; Večerı́k et al., 2017) can be
interpreted as degenerated cases of our method int terms of
how to leverage the demonstration data.
We evaluate our POfD on physical locomotion tasks based
on Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012) in sparse-reward environments. We compare POfD against 5 state-of-the-art
baselines. The experiments clearly demonstrate that POfD
surpasses all the well-established baselines and performs
very well in these environments. Its performance is even
comparable with that achieved by policy gradient methods
in oracle dense-reward environments.

2. Related Work
Recently, learning from demonstration (LfD) (Schaal, 1997)
has received increasing attention as a promising way to
overcome exploration difﬁculties in RL (Subramanian et al.,
2016). Most LfD methods adopt value-based RL algorithms,
which are off-policy in nature. For instance, DQfD (Hester
et al., 2017) introduces LfD into DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) by
adding demonstration data into the replay buffer. It uses a
reﬁned priority replay mechanism (Schaul et al., 2015) and
gives additional priority to the demonstration data. However,
DQfD is limited to applications with discrete action spaces.
DDPGfD (Večerı́k et al., 2017) extends LfD to continuous
action domains, which is built upon DDPG (Lillicrap et al.,
2015) similar to DQfD. Both DQfD and DDPGfD suffer the
problem of under-exploiting demonstration data, as detailed
in Sec. 5. Some existing methods leverage demonstration
data in different ways. Kim et al. (2013); Piot et al. (2014)
are based on policy iteration and use demonstration data
to shape the value function. Moreover, they require the
value of demonstrated state-action pairs to be larger than
the others with a margin. Those methods would suffer performance decline when only imperfect demo data are given.
Aravind S. Lakshminarayanan (2016) considered LfD under settings where the demonstration data are in paucity.
They proposed a hybrid framework that learns the policy

in which the probability of taking demonstrated actions is
maximized. Recently, Brys et al. (2015) introduced a reward
reshaping mechanism to encourage taking actions close to
the demonstrated ones. They share a similar motivation
with us but their method has a different course. They deﬁned a potential function based on multi-variate Gaussian to
model the distribution of state-actions. Different from our
POfD, all the above methods require a signiﬁcantly large
amount of perfect demonstration data to achieve satisfactory
performance.
Imitation learning aims at mimicking expert behaviors,
which can be realized in multiple ways. Most recent successful imitation learning algorithms are based on Inverse
Reinforce Learning (IRL) (Ng et al., 2000), which targets
at recovering the reward function of a given task from samples, without knowing the dynamics. Following this line,
Syed & Schapire (2008); Syed et al. (2008) casted IRL
problems as a two-player zero-sum game which is then
solved by alternating between ﬁtting the reward function
and selecting the policy. However, their capacity is limited
to small-scale problems. Very recently, Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016) is
shown to be very effective in high-dimensional continuous
control problems. Instead of ﬁtting the underlying reward
function as traditional IRL algorithms, GAIL uses a discriminator to distinguish whether a state-action pair is from the
expert or the learned policy. Meanwhile, GAIL optimizes
the policy to confuse the discriminator. Though effective
for imitation learning, these algorithms cannot leverage the
valuable feedback given by the environments and usually
suffer sharp performance decline when the expert data are
imperfect. Our POfD overcomes such inherent limitations
by learning from feedbacks and can learn well-performing
policies even though the expert data are imperfect.
A similar and contemporary idea has also been introduced
in (Li et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2018) to learn an agent with
hybrid imitation learning and reinforcement learning reward.
However, they only treat it as a heuristic method and provide
intuitive explanations. In contrast, we consider a novel practical setting and develop the reward reshaping mechanism
theoretically with monotonic improvement guarantee.

3. Background
3.1. Preliminaries
We consider the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(Sutton & Barto, 1998). MDP is deﬁned by a tuple
S, A, P, r, γ, where S and A are the state space and the
action space respectively, P(s |s, a) is the transition distribution of taking action a at state s, r(s, a) is the reward
function, and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
Given a stochastic policy π(a|s) = p(a|s; π) mapping from

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

states to action probabilities, the performance of π is usually
evaluated by its expected discounted reward η(π):

∞

t
γ r(st , at ) ,
η(π) = Eπ [r(s, a)] = E(s0 ,a0 ,s1 ,... )
t=0

(1)
where (s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . ) is a trajectory generated by executing policy π, i.e., s0 ∼ p0 , at ∼ π(·|st ) and st+1 ∼
P(·|st , at ). Similarly, following the standard deﬁnitions,
the value function Vπ and action value function Qπ can
be written as Vπ (s) = Eπ [r(·, ·)|s0 =s] and Qπ (s, a) =
Eπ [r(·, ·)|s0 =s, a0 =a]. Subtracting Qπ (s, a) by Vπ (s)
gives the advantage function Aπ (s, a) = Qπ (s, a) − Vπ (s)
that reﬂects the expected additional reward that the agent
will get after taking action a in state s.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998) is a
set of algorithms trying to infer a policy achieving maximal
reward η(π) with regard to some form of reward signals
r(s, a) from trajectories D = {τi } generated by executing
a current policy (on-policy methods) or some other policy
(off-policy methods). Each trajectory consists of a sequence
of state transitions τ = {(s0 , a0 ), (s1 , a1 ), . . . , (sT , aT )}.
The occupancy measure, deﬁned as follows, characterizes
the distribution of action-state pairs when executing policy
π. It will play an important role in our analysis.
Deﬁnition 1. (Occupancy measure) Let ρπ (s) : S → R
denote the unnormalized distribution of state visitation by
following policy π in the environment:
ρπ (s) =

∞


γ t P (st = s|π).

t=0

Then the unnormalized distribution of state-action pairs
ρπ (s, a) = ρπ (s)π(a|s) is called occupancy measure of
policy π.
Substituting ρπ (s, a) into Eqn. (1), we have the following
equivalent formulation for the expectation over policy π:
∞ 




π(a|s)γ t r(s, a)

3.2. Problem Deﬁnition
In practice, most RL tasks and environments do not provide a well-designed reward function. Instead, only a little
sparse feedback indicating whether the goal is reached is
available. Existing RL algorithms usually fail to explore and
collect useful information in such sparse-reward settings. In
this work, we are interested in solving such a challenging
problem by developing a method capable of learning from
both (sparse) rewards and expert demonstrations.
In particular, in addition to sparse rewards from environments as in traditional RL settings, the agent is also
provided with a few (and possibly imperfect) demonstrations DE = {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τN }, where the i-th trajectory
τi = {(si0 , ai0 ), (si1 , ai1 ), . . . , (siT , aiT )} is generated from
executing an unknown expert policy πE in the environment.
We aim to develop a method that can boost exploration
through effectively leveraging DE in such settings and maximize η(π) in Eqn. (1).
Throughout the paper, we use πE to denote the expert policy
that gives the relatively good η(π), and use ÊD to denote
empirical expectation estimated from the demonstrated trajectories DE . We have the following reasonable and necessary assumption on the quality of the expert policy πE .
Assumption 1. In early learning stages, we assume acting
according to expert policy πE will provide higher advantage
value with a margin as least δ over current policy π, i.e.,
EaE ∼πE ,a∼π [Aπ (s, aE ) − Aπ (s, a)] ≥ δ.
We do not need to assume the expert policy πE to be advantageous over all the policies, as our proposed POfD will
learn from both rewards and demonstrations and can possibly learn a policy better than πE through exploration on its
own in later learning stages.

4. Method
4.1. Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

which provides an alternative way to compute the expected
discounted return. An important property of the occupancy
measure is that it uniquely speciﬁes a policy, as described
in the following lemma.

Suppose πθ is a θ-parameterized policy and is differentiable.
Policy gradient methods optimize the expected return η(πθ )
by updating θ with the gradient of η(πθ ) w.r.t. θ (Sutton
et al., 2000; Williams, 1992). They usually start optimizing
the policy πθ by random exploration, which may cause
slow convergence when the state and action spaces have
high dimensionality, and may even lead to failure when the
environment feedback is sparse. We propose to address
this problem by forcing the policy to explore in the nearby
region of the expert policy πE (as shown in Fig.1), which is
speciﬁed by several demonstrated trajectories DE .

Lemma 1. (Theorem 2 of (Syed et al., 2008)) Suppose ρ is
the occupancy measure for πρ (a|s)   ρ(s,a)
 . Then πρ
a ρ(s,a )
is the only policy whose occupancy measure is ρ.

To this end, besides maximizing the expected return η(πθ )
through learning from sparse feedback during interaction with environments, we also encourage the policy π

Eπ [r(s, a)] =

t=0

=


s

=



P (st = s|π)

s

ρπ (s)



a

π(a|s)r(s, a)

(2)

a

ρπ (s, a)r(s, a),

s,a

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

previous iteration. Eqn. (4) can be rewritten as


η(π) = η(πold ) +
ρπ (s)
π(a|s)Aπold (s, a).
s

Figure 1. Our proposed POfD explores in the high-reward regions
(red arrows), with the aid of demonstrations (the blue curve). It
thus performs better than random explorations (olive green dashed
curves) in sparse-reward environments.

to explore by “following” the demonstrations DE . We
therefore introduce demonstration-guided exploration term
LM (πθ , πE ) = DJS (πθ , πE ), which is deﬁned over JensenShannon divergence between current policy πθ and the expert one πE , to the vanilla objective η(πθ ). This gives a new
learning objective:
L(πθ ) = −η(πθ ) + λ1 DJS (πθ , πE ),
where λ1 is a trading-off parameter. However, the above
policy divergence measure between πθ and πE is infeasible
as πE is unknown. Fortunately, leveraging the one-to-one
correspondence between the policy and occupancy measure
as given by Lemma 1, we can instead deﬁne a divergence
over the occupancy measures ρπ (s, a) and ρπE (s, a), which
is easier to optimize through adversarial training on demonstrations, as we will show later. Based on their occupancy
measure LM  DJS (ρθ , ρE ), where ρθ and ρE are short
for ρπθ and ρπE , our proposed demonstration guided learning objective is
L(πθ ) = −η(πθ ) + λ1 DJS (ρθ , ρE ).

(3)

We here slightly abuse DJS to apply it to the unnormalized
distribution ρ. Later, we will establish a lower bound to it
without needing to directly optimize it.
4.2. Beneﬁts of Exploration with Demonstrations
To better understand the new objective (3), we here prove
that introducing the guiding term DJS (ρθ , ρE ) boosts the
advantage value for the learned policy, and brings nontrivial beneﬁts in terms of policy improvement for policy
gradient methods. To see this, we introduce following the
useful expression at ﬁrst (Kakade & Langford, 2002) that
is commonly used in policy gradient methods (Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017; Kakade, 2002),

∞

t
γ Aπold (s, a) .
(4)
η(π) = η(πold ) + Eτ ∼π
t=0

In the above, the expected return η(π) of policy π is expressed in terms of the advantage over the policy πold in the

(5)

a

To alleviate difﬁculties brought by complex dependency of
ρπ (s) over π, policy gradient methods usually optimize the
following surrogate objective, which is a local approximation to η(π) up to ﬁrst order:


ρπold (s)
π(a|s)Aπold (s, a),
Jπold (π) = η(πold ) +
s

a

where ρπ is replaced by ρπold and we ignore the change
in state distribution due to policy update. Policy gradient
methods are guaranteed to improve η(π) monotonically
by optimizing the above surrogate Jπold (π) with a sufﬁmax
ciently small update step πold → π such that DKL
(π, πold )
is bounded (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Kakade, 2002).
In particular, TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) imposes
max
hard constraints with ﬁxed penalty on DKL
(π, πold ) while
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and natural policy gradimax
(π, πold ) for regularization
ent (Kakade, 2002) use DKL
with ﬁxed or adaptive weights.
POfD additionally imposes a regularization DJS (πθ , πE )
between πθ and πE in order to encourage explorations
around regions demonstrated by the expert πE . We formally
show the beneﬁts from leveraging the expert demonstration
in this way by giving the following theorem.
max
Theorem 1. Let α
=
DKL
(πold , π)
=
max
(πE , π) =
maxs DKL (π(·|s), πold (·|s)), β = DJS
maxs DJS (π(·|s), πE (·|s)), and πE is an expert policy
satisfying Assumption 1. Then we have
η(π) ≥ Jπold (π) −

2γ(4βE + απ )
δ
,
+
2
(1 − γ)
1−γ

where E = maxs,a |AπE (s, a)| , π = maxs,a |Aπ (s, a)|.
We provide proof in the supplement. The above theorem
implies the beneﬁts of adding matching regularization. Let
max
max
(π, πE ) − Cπ DKL
(π, πi ) + δ̂
Mi (π) = Jπi (π) − CπE DJS
8γE
2γπ
δ
where CπE = (1−γ)2 , Cπ = (1−γ)2 , δ̂ = 1−γ . Then,
η(πi+1 ) ≥ Mi (πi+1 ),
max
η(πi ) = Mi (πi ) + CπE DJS
(πi , πE ) − δ̂,

η(πi+1 ) − η(πi )
max
≥ Mi (πi+1 ) − Mi (πi ) − CπE DJS
(πi , πE ) + δ̂.

The above result is reminiscent of classic monotonic improvement guarantees for policy gradient methods (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Kakade, 2002). However, POfD brings another factor to the improvement
max
−CπE DJS
(πi , πE ) + δ̂. This implies that following the
max
demonstrations (i.e., having small DJS
(πi , πE )) will fully
utilize the advantage δ̂ and bring improvement with a margin
over pure policy gradient methods.

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

4.3. Optimization
In this subsection, we introduce a practical optimization
algorithm for Eqn. (3), which is compatible with any policy gradient methods. In particular, instead of performing
optimization on the difﬁcult Jensen-Shannon divergence
directly, we optimize its lower bound given as follows.
−u

e
Theorem 2. Let h(u) = log( 1+e1−u ), h̄(u) = log( 1+e
−u )
and U (s, a) : S × A → R be an arbitrary function. Then
we have

DJS (ρπ , ρE ) ≥


sup Eρπ [h(U (s, a))] + EρE [h̄(U (s, a))] + log 4.
U

We defer the proof to supplement due to space limit. With
the above theorem, the occupancy measure matching objective LM can be written as
LM  sup

Eπθ [log(D(s, a))] + EπE [log(1 − D(s, a))],
D∈(0,1)S×A

1
where D(s, a) = 1+e−U
(s,a) : S × A → (0, 1) is an arbitrary mapping function followed by a sigmoid activation
function for scaling. The supremum ranging over D(s, a)
thus represents the optimal binary classiﬁcation loss of distinguishing the current policy πθ and the expert policy πE
w.r.t. the state-action pairs sampled from ρθ and ρE .

To avoid potential overﬁtting risks, we introduce causal
entropy −H(πθ ) as another regularization term, similar
to (Ziebart et al., 2008; Ziebart, 2010). Therefore, the overall
objective of our proposed POfD is formulated as
min L = −η(πθ ) − λ2 H(πθ )+
θ

λ1 sup

Eπθ [log(D(s, a))] + EπE [log(1 − D(s, a))].
D∈(0,1)S×A

It is actually a minimax problem closely related to
the learning target of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). GANs aim to train a
generative model G to produce samples indistinguishable
from the ones from real distributions for a well-trained discriminative model D. In our case, the true distribution is the
expert policy πE (a|s), or equivalently the expert occupancy
measure ρE (s, a). The generator to learn is the policy model
πθ (a|s). Suppose D is parameterized by w. By labeling
expert state-action pairs as true (“1”) and policy state-action
pairs as false (“0”), we get the following objective,
min max L = −η(πθ ) − λ2 H(πθ )+
θ

w

λ1 (Eπθ [log(Dw (s, a))] + EπE [log(1 − Dw (s, a))]) .
(6)
Moreover, the minimax objective (6) can be simpliﬁed by
substituting Eqn. (1) and Eqn. (2) into it, resulting in a

dynamic reward reshaping mechanism over the original
reward signal:
min max − Eπθ [r (s, a)] − λ2 H(πθ )
θ

w

+ λ1 EπE [log(1 − Dw (s, a))],

(7)

where r (s, a) = r(a, b) − λ1 log(Dw (s, a)) is the reshaped
reward function. This function augments the environment
reward with demonstration information. When the environment feedback is sparse or exploration is insufﬁcient, the
augmented reward can force the policy to generate similar
trajectories as the expert policy πE . In other words, the
divergence of π and πE is minimized. Therefore, our algorithm is able to explore the environment more efﬁciently.
The above objective can be optimized efﬁciently by alternately updating policy parameters θ and discriminator parameters w. First, trajectories are sampled by executing
the current policy πθ and mixed with demonstration data to
train the discriminator by SGD. The gradient is given by
Eπ [∇w log(Dw (s, a))] + EπE [∇w log(1 − Dw (s, a))].
Then, ﬁxing the discriminator Dw , i.e., a ﬁxed reward function r (s, a), the policy πθ is optimized with a chosen policy
gradient method. In particular, by policy gradient theorem
(Sutton et al., 2000), the reshaped policy gradient is:
∇θ Eπθ [r (s, a)] = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ (a|s)Q (s, a)],
where Q (s̄, ā) = Eπθ [r (s, a)|s0 = s̄, a0 = ā].
The gradient for causal entropy regularization is given by
∇θ Eπθ [− log πθ (a|s)] = Eπθ [∇θ log πθ (a|s)QH (s, a)],
where QH (s̄, ā) = Eπθ [− log πθ (a|s)|s0 = s̄, a0 = ā].
The optimization details are summarized in Alg. 1. It is compatible with any policy gradient methods, e.g., TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).

5. Discussion on Existing LfD Methods
DQfD (Hester et al., 2017) and DDPGfD (Večerı́k et al.,
2017) are two latest LfD methods. They both leverage
demonstrations to aid exploration in RL, aiming to improve
RL in terms of either convergence speed or performance.
Here we provide a new perspective that interprets DQfD
and DDPGfD through occupancy measure matching, which
thus connects them with our POfD.
DQfD The DQfD method is built upon Deep Q-Networks
(DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015). As a Q-learning algorithm, DQN
models the Q value with a w-parameterized neural network
Qw (s, a). The objective for optimizing Qw is
2

JDQN = E[(Rt (n) − Qw (st , at )) ], where
Rt (n) =

t+n−1

i=t

γ i−t ri + max γ n Qw (st+n , a).
a

(8)

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

Algorithm 1 Policy optimization with demonstrations
E
Input: Expert demonstrations DE = {τ1E , . . . , τN
}, ini-

tial policy and discriminator parameters θ0 and w0 , regularization weights λ1 , λ2 , maximal iterations I.
for i = 1 to I do
Sample trajectories Di = {τ }, τ ∼ πθi .
Sample expert trajectories DiE ⊂ DE .
Update discriminator parameters from wi to wi+1 with
the gradient
ÊDi [∇w log(Dw (s, a))]+ÊDiE [∇w log(1−Dw (s, a))]
Update the rewards in Di with
r (s, a) = r(a, b)−λ1 log(Dwi (s, a)), ∀(s, a, r) ∈ Di
Update the policy with policy gradient method (e.g.,
TRPO, PPO) using the following gradient
ÊDi [∇θ log πθ (a|s)Q (s, a)] − λ2 ∇θ H(πθi )
end for
DQfD takes advantage of demonstration data by putting
them into a replay memory D and keeping them throughout
the Q-learning process. Here we show minimizing Eqn. (8)
with expert demonstration and self-generated off-policy data
is actually equivalent to imposing an occupancy measure
matching regularization to the original DQN objective 1 .
Let DE denote the replay memory containing expert data
only. Then the objective (8) for DQfD can be separated as
2

JDQfD = ÊD [(Rt (n) − Qw (st , at )) ]+
2

αÊDE [(Rt (n) − Qw (st , at )) ],

(9)

where α is speciﬁed by the ratio of samples from D and DE .
Based on Eqn. (2), Qw (s, a) = E[r(·, ·)|s0 =s, a0 =a] =
ρπ (s, a)r(s, a), and QE (s, a) = ρE (s, a)r(s, a). Thus
2

ÊDE [(Rt (n) − Qw (st , at )) ]


2
= ÊDE (ρ̂E (s, a) − ρπ (s, a)) r2 (s, a) ,

(10)

which can be interpreted as a regularization forcing current
policy’s occupancy measure to match the expert’s empirical
occupancy measure, weighted by the potential reward we
will get from that state-action pair. For high reward stateaction pairs, there is a greater penalty on the discrepancy
between ρ̂E and ρπ .
1
DQfD has two training stages and an extra supervised loss
JE (Q) = maxa∈A [A(s, a) + (aE , a) − Q(s, aE )]. In the pretraining stage, DQfD trains on the demonstrations with JE . In
the RL training stage, JE becomes less signiﬁcant. Since we
are interested in the Q-learning part of DQfD and how it utilizes
demonstration data, we focus on analyzing objective (8).

DDPGfD Similar to DQfD, DDPGfD leverages the
demonstration data by putting them into the replay memory.
But DDPGfD is based on an actor-critic framework (Lillicrap et al., 2015). Aside from a Q-network Qw , DDPGfD
introduces another policy network parameterized by θ to
model a deterministic policy πθ (s). Its Q-network is optimized off-policy with Eqn. (8), while its policy network is
optimized directly with the following gradient of Q-value
Qw (s, a) w.r.t. the action a = πθ (s):
∇θ JDDPGfD ≈ Es,a [∇a Qw (s, a)∇θ πθ (s)], a = πθ (s).
The above equation shows that the update of policy πθ
is not directly dependent on the demonstration data DE ,
but depends on the learned Q-network Qw solely. Since
DDPGfD shares the same objective function for Qw as
DQfD, as well as the same way of leveraging demonstrations
as shown in Eqn. (9) and Eqn. (10). Thus we can draw a
similar conclusion, i.e. demonstrations in DDPGfD induce
an occupancy measure matching regularization.
Although the above replay memory based LfD methods can
beneﬁt RL algorithms to some extent in sparse-reward environments, they can not sufﬁciently exploit the demonstration
data due to following limitations. First, such a paradigm
utilizes expert trajectories only by treating them as learning
reference, whose effect may be signiﬁcantly underexploited
when demonstrations are few, as veriﬁed by our experiments.
Second, to be compatible with collected data during training,
the demonstrated trajectories are required to be associated
with rewards for each state transition. However, the rewards
in demonstrations may differ from the ones used for learning
the policy in the current environment (Ziebart et al., 2008),
or they may be unavailable.
By reformulating the original objective (9) into (10), we ﬁnd
that, instead of mixing expert data with self-generated data,
putting an occupancy measure matching regularization can
avoid the requirement of rewards in demonstrations, as what
POfD does. In this way, LfD will no longer be restricted to
the off-policy RL setting.

6. Experiments
In this section, we aim at investigating 1) whether POfD
can aid exploration when provided with a few demonstrations, even though the demonstrations are imperfect, and
2) whether POfD can succeed and achieve high empirical
return, especially when feedback of the environment is extremely sparse. To comprehensively assess our method, we
conduct extensive experiments on eight widely used physical control tasks, ranging from low-dimensional ones such
as cartpole (Barto et al., 1983) and mountain car (Moore,
1990) to high-dimensional and naturally sparse environments based on OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016) and
Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012). The speciﬁcations of envi-

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

ronments we used are given in Table 1.
Settings In view of the property of each individual environment, we apply four ways for sparsifying their builtin dense rewards for evaluating performance of different
methods in sparse-reward environments, detailed as follows.
TYPE1: a reward of +1 is given when the agent reaches
the terminal state, and otherwisely 0. This is also employed
by (Houthooft et al., 2016) for MountainCar. TYPE2: a
reward of +1 is given when the agent survives for a while
(e.g., 200 steps for CartPole). TYPE3: a reward of +1 is
given for every time the agent moves forward over a speciﬁc
number of units in Mujoco environments. TYPE4: specially designed for InvertedDoublePendulum, a reward +1
is given when the second pole stays above a speciﬁc height
of 0.89. Instead of providing dense rewards to state-action
pairs at every step, the environment directly tells the agent
the target state, e.g. reaching a goal and moving forward,
through providing sparse rewards. This is more practical
and hence we do not consider extensive reward engineering.
For clearer distinction, we call the original simulator dense
environments, while the ones with altered reward are called
sparse environments.
Without speciﬁcation, we use only one single imperfect trajectory as demonstrations. To collect demonstrations, we
train an agent insufﬁciently by running TRPO (Schulman
et al., 2015) in the corresponding dense environment. Then,
an imperfect trajectory is randomly sampled by executing
the agent. Our POfD is evaluated using two metrics. First,
for each sparse environment, the method is run for 5 times
with different random initialization and we investigate training curves to understand how POfD facilitates exploration.
Second, empirical returns in numerical values are calculated
by averaging over 500 cumulated rewards for the learned
policy. We compare POfD against ﬁve strong baselines,
including 1) training the policy with TRPO (Schulman et al.,
2015) in dense environments which is referred to as expert;
2) training the policy with TRPO in sparse environments;
3) applying GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016) to learn the policy
from demonstrations, under the same setting as our POfD; 4)
DQfD and 5) DDPGfD, which are the state-of-the-art LfD
algorithms for discrete and continuous actions respectively.
Implementation Details Due to space limit, we defer implementation details to the supplementary material.
Results We ﬁrst test the performance of POfD in sparse
control environments with discrete actions, including CartPole and MountainCar. The learning curves are plotted in
Fig. 2, while the averaged cumulated rewards are given in
Table 1. From the numerical results in Table 1, we can see
that our method achieves performance comparable with the
policy learned under dense environments, e.g., -98.38 vs

Figure 2. Learning curves of our POfD versus strong baselines
under sparse environments with discrete action space.

-98.75 for CartPole, even though POfD only has access to
sparse rewards and a single demonstration trajectory that
is much worse than the expert. The learning curves in
Fig. 2 demonstrate that both TRPO and DQfD fail to explore sufﬁciently to obtain informative feedback from the
sparse environments. The demonstration data insufﬁciency
severely limits the learning ability of DQfD which usually
requires as many demonstration data as self-generated ones.
Furthermore, GAIL succeeds in CartPole but converges to
the imperfect demonstration data in MontainCar. Our POfD
outperforms GAIL by a signiﬁcant margin in terms of both
convergence rate and ﬁnal performance.
Then POfD as well as the baselines are evaluated in sparse
locomotion control tasks, including Hopper, HalfCheetah,
Walker2d and InvertedDoublePendulum. Similarly, the numerical results are listed in Table 1 while the learning course
is visualized in Fig. 3. Throughout the four experiments,
POfD achieves expert-level performance in terms of cumulated rewards. Moreover, POfD surpasses TRPO in dense
environments substantially in multiple environments. For
example, observing results of Walker2D, POfD obtains an
averaged return of 7687.47, while the expert is only 6717.08.
The margin becomes more remarkable considering the return of demonstration data we use is only 1701.13, strongly
proving that our intrinsic reward reshaping mechanism beneﬁts the exploration a lot. Observing the learning process
of different methods, it is clear that TRPO consistently fails
to explore the environments when the feedback is sparse,
except for HalfCheetah. This may be because there is no
terminal state in HalfCheetah, thus a random agent can
perform reasonably well as long as the time horizon is sufﬁciently long. This can be observed in the ﬁgure where
the improvement of TRPO emerges very late (after 400
iterations). DDPGfD and GAIL share some common drawback: they both converge to the imperfect demonstration
data as training proceeds. For HalfCheetah, GAIL fails to
converge and DDPGfD converges to an even worse point.
This is well expected because the policy and value networks
are prone to over-ﬁtting when the data are few. Thus the

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations
Table 1. Environment speciﬁcations and results. All results are measured in the corresponding dense environment expect for Reacher
which is evaluated in a naturally sparse environment.
Empirical Return
Expert

S

A

Sparsiﬁcation

MountainCar-v1
CartPole-v0

2

R
R4

{0, 1, 2}
{0, 1}

TYPE1
TYPE2

−165.0
49

−98.75
500

−98.35 ± 9.35
500 ± 0

Hopper-v1
HalfCheetah-v1
Walker2d-v1
DoublePendulum-v1

R11
R17
R17
R11

R3
R6
R6
R

TYPE3 (1 unit)
TYPE3 (15 unit)
TYPE3 (1 unit)
TYPE4

793.86
1827.77
1701.13
520.23

3571.38
4463.46
6717.08
8399.86

3652.23 ± 263.62
4771.15 ± 646.96
7687.47 ± 394.97
9116.08 ± 1290.74

Humanoid-v1
Reacher-v1

R376
R11

R17
R2

TYPE3 (1 unit)
TYPE1

2800.05
0.73

9575.40
0.75

9823.43 ± 2015.48
0.86 ± 0.34

Environment

Demonstration

Ours

Figure 3. Learning curves of our POfD versus baselines under sparse environments with continuous action space.

training process of GAIL and DDPGfD is severely biased
by the imperfect data. Eventually, our proposed method
can effectively explore the environment with the help of
demonstration-based intrinsic reward reshaping, and succeeds consistently across different tasks both in terms of
learning stability and convergence speed.
Humanoid is a locomotion task about teaching a human-like
robot to walk naturally. This task has a state space of dimension as high as 376, rendering it much harder than the above
investigated tasks. The experimental results in Table 1 indicate that POfD still achieves expert-level performance. The
learning curves in Fig. 3 demonstrate that all the other three
baseline methods, i.e., TRPO, GAIL and DDPGfD, fail to
learn good policies from such a reward-sparse environment.
In particular, the LfD baselines, i.e., GAIL and DDPGfD,
cannot even reach the demonstration performance (the yellow horizontal line in the ﬁgure). In stark contrast, POfD
converges fast and stably to the expert level performance.
Such results strongly support that POfD can generalize well
to challenging tasks with high-dimensional state spaces.
The last environment we use for evaluation is Reacher. It
is an environment where rewards are naturally sparse and
is difﬁcult to solve. The target of this task is to control the
robot arm to touch the target red ball. The environment
reward is sparse: every time the arm reaches the ball and
holds for a while (e.g., 5 time steps), it receives a reward of
+1; otherwise it gets zero reward. For every instantiation of
the environment, the location of the target ball is randomly

generated. This increases the task difﬁculty signiﬁcantly.
In Gym implementation, it is signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed by
crafting a distance-to-target based reward function and we
only use it to generate demonstrations. In the experiments,
we randomly select 15 trajectories as demonstration data.
The numerical results in Table 1 show that the performance
of our POfD (0.86) is much better than the expert (0.75).
The learning curves in Fig 3 also demonstrate that all the
other baseline methods fail on this task.

7. Conclusion
We considered the problems of reinforcement learning
within sparse-reward environments, and proposed a general learning from demonstration method, i.e., POfD to gain
stronger exploration ability. POfD is compatible with any
policy gradient methods. We explicitly analyzed how POfD
improves the policy by leveraging the beneﬁts of demonstration for exploration. A simple dynamic reward reshaping
based optimization algorithm for POfD was provided that
connects to the generative adversarial training and can be
applied efﬁciently. The POfD was shown to be effective in
encouraging the agent to explore around the nearby region
of the expert policy and learning better policies, through extensive experimental results. To our best knowledge, POfD
is the ﬁrst one that can acquire knowledge from few and
imperfect demonstration data to aid exploration in environments with sparse feedback.

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by NUS startup R-263000-C08-133, MOE Tier-I R-263-000-C21-112, NUS IDS
R-263-000-C67-646, ECRA R-263-000-C87-133 and MOE
Tier-II R-263-000-D17-112.

References
Aravind S. Lakshminarayanan, Sherjil Ozair, Y. B. Reinforcement learning with few expert demonstrations. In
NIPS workshop, 2016.
Barto, A. G., Sutton, R. S., and Anderson, C. W. Neuronlike
adaptive elements that can solve difﬁcult learning control problems. IEEE transactions on systems, man, and
cybernetics, (5):834–846, 1983.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J.,
Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. Openai gym,
2016.

Langley, P. Crafting papers on machine learning. In Langley,
P. (ed.), Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML 2000), pp. 1207–1216, Stanford, CA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann.
Li, Y., Song, J., and Ermon, S. Infogail: Interpretable imitation learning from visual demonstrations. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3815–3825,
2017.
Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez,
T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous
control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):
529–533, 2015.

Brys, T., Harutyunyan, A., Suay, H. B., Chernova, S., Taylor, M. E., and Nowé, A. Reinforcement learning from
demonstration through shaping. In IJCAI, pp. 3352–3358,
2015.

Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap,
T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1928–
1937, 2016.

Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B.,
Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio,
Y. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.

Moore, A. W. Efﬁcient memory-based learning for robot
control. 1990.

Hester, T., Vecerik, M., Pietquin, O., Lanctot, M., Schaul,
T., Piot, B., Sendonaris, A., Dulac-Arnold, G., Osband,
I., Agapiou, J., et al. Learning from demonstrations
for real world reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.03732, 2017.
Ho, J. and Ermon, S. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4565–4573, 2016.
Houthooft, R., Chen, X., Duan, Y., Schulman, J., De Turck,
F., and Abbeel, P. Vime: Variational information maximizing exploration. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 1109–1117, 2016.
Kakade, S. and Langford, J. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In ICML, volume 2, pp.
267–274, 2002.
Kakade, S. M. A natural policy gradient. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pp. 1531–1538,
2002.
Kim, B., Farahmand, A.-m., Pineau, J., and Precup, D.
Learning from limited demonstrations. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2859–2867,
2013.

Nair, A., McGrew, B., Andrychowicz, M., Zaremba, W.,
and Abbeel, P. Overcoming exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.10089, 2017.
Ng, A. Y., Russell, S. J., et al. Algorithms for inverse
reinforcement learning. In Icml, pp. 663–670, 2000.
Pathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T.
Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), volume 2017, 2017.
Piot, B., Geist, M., and Pietquin, O. Boosted bellman residual minimization handling expert demonstrations. In Joint
European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 549–564. Springer,
2014.
Plappert, M., Houthooft, R., Dhariwal, P., Sidor, S., Chen,
R. Y., Chen, X., Asfour, T., Abbeel, P., and Andrychowicz, M. Parameter space noise for exploration. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.01905, 2017.
Schaal, S. Learning from demonstration. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pp. 1040–1046,
1997.

Policy Optimization with Demonstrations

Schaul, T., Quan, J., Antonoglou, I., and Silver, D. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952,
2015.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz,
P. Trust region policy optimization. In Proceedings of
the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML-15), pp. 1889–1897, 2015.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L.,
Van Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I.,
Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the
game of go with deep neural networks and tree search.
nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou,
I., Huang, A., Guez, A., Hubert, T., Baker, L., Lai, M.,
Bolton, A., et al. Mastering the game of go without
human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354, 2017.
Subramanian, K., Isbell Jr, C. L., and Thomaz, A. L. Exploration from demonstration for interactive reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Autonomous Agents & Multiagent Systems,
pp. 447–456. International Foundation for Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2016.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An
introduction, volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998.
Sutton, R. S., McAllester, D. A., Singh, S. P., and Mansour,
Y. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning
with function approximation. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1057–1063, 2000.
Syed, U. and Schapire, R. E. A game-theoretic approach to
apprenticeship learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1449–1456, 2008.
Syed, U., Bowling, M., and Schapire, R. E. Apprenticeship
learning using linear programming. In Proceedings of the
25th international conference on Machine learning, pp.
1032–1039. ACM, 2008.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Mujoco: A physics
engine for model-based control. In Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012.
Van Hasselt, H., Guez, A., and Silver, D. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning. In AAAI, volume 16, pp. 2094–2100, 2016.

Večerı́k, M., Hester, T., Scholz, J., Wang, F., Pietquin, O.,
Piot, B., Heess, N., Rothörl, T., Lampe, T., and Riedmiller,
M. Leveraging demonstrations for deep reinforcement
learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.
Williams, R. J. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine
learning, 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.
Zhu, Y., Wang, Z., Merel, J., Rusu, A., Erez, T., Cabi, S.,
Tunyasuvunakool, S., Kramár, J., Hadsell, R., de Freitas,
N., et al. Reinforcement and imitation learning for diverse visuomotor skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09564,
2018.
Ziebart, B. D. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with
the principle of maximum causal entropy. Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
Ziebart, B. D., Maas, A. L., Bagnell, J. A., and Dey, A. K.
Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning. In
AAAI, volume 8, pp. 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.

